Restructure influxdb3 /plugins for step-by-step clarity (#5963)
influxdata/docs-v2: content/shared/v3-core-plugins/_index.md

- A working InfluxDB 3 Core instance
- Access to command line
- Python installed if you're writing your own plugin
- Basic knowledge of the InfluxDB CLI

Once you have all the prerequisites in place, follow these steps to implement the Processing Engine for your data automation needs.

1. [Set up the Processing Engine](#set-up-the-processing-engine)
2. [Add a Processing Engine plugin](#add-a-processing-engine-plugin)
   - [Use example plugins](#use-example-plugins)
   - [Create a custom plugin](#create-a-custom-plugin)
3. [Create a trigger to run a plugin](#create-a-trigger-to-run-a-plugin)
   - [Understand trigger types](#understand-trigger-types)
   - [Create a trigger](#create-a-trigger)
   - [Choose a trigger specification](#choose-a-trigger-specification)
4. [Advanced trigger configuration](#advanced-trigger-configuration)
   - [Access community plugins from GitHub](#access-community-plugins-from-github)
   - [Pass arguments to plugins](#pass-arguments-to-plugins)
   - [Control trigger execution](#control-trigger-execution)
   - [Configure error handling for a trigger](#configure-error-handling-for-a-trigger)
   - [Install Python dependencies](#install-python-dependencies)

> ## Set up the Processing Engine

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Activate the Processing Engine
```

## Set up the Processing engine

> To enable the Processing engine, start your InfluxDB server with the `--plugin-dir` flag to specify where your plugin files are stored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable the Processing engine, start your {{% product-name %}} server with the `--plugin-dir` flag to specify where your plugin files are stored.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% code-placeholders "NODE_ID|OBJECT_STORE_TYPE|/PATH/TO/PLUGINS" %}}
```

  --plugin-dir /path/to/plugins

> ```
> 
> Replace: 
> - `<NODE_ID>` with a unique identifier for your instance
> - `<OBJECT_STORE_TYPE>` with the type of object store (e.g., file, memory, s3)
> - /absolute/path/to/plugins with the path to your plugin directory
> 
> Replace `/path/to/plugins` with the directory where you want to store your Python plugin files. All plugin files must be located in this directory or its subdirectories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% /code-placeholders %}}

Replace the following: 

- {{% code-placeholder-key %}}`NODE_ID`{{% /code-placeholder-key %}}: a unique identifier for your instance
- {{% code-placeholder-key %}}`OBJECT_STORE_TYPE`{{% /code-placeholder-key %}}: the type of object store (for example: `file` or `s3`)
- {{% code-placeholder-key %}}`/PATH/TO/PLUGINS`{{% /code-placeholder-key %}}: the absolute path to the directory where you want to store your Python plugin files. _All plugin files must be located in this directory or its subdirectories._
```

- Make placeholders user-editable.
- Placeholders in the code should match placeholders in the definitions list

>
> Configure your plugin directory on the same system as the nodes that run the triggers and plugins.

## Add a Processing engine plugin

The plugin directory must exist before you start InfluxDB.

## Add a Processing engine plugin

> A plugin is a Python file that contains a specific function signature that corresponds to a trigger type. InfluxData maintains a repository of contributed plugins that you can use as-is or as a starting point for your own plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A plugin is a Python file that contains a specific function signature that corresponds to a type of trigger (a _trigger spec_).
```

   - **System monitoring**: Track resource usage and health metrics

2. **Choose how to access plugins**:

**Option A: Copy plugins to your local directory**
   
```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/influxdata/influxdb3_plugins.git
   
# Copy a plugin to your configured plugin directory
cp influxdb3_plugins/examples/schedule/system_metrics/system_metrics.py /path/to/plugins/
```

**Option B: Use plugins directly from GitHub**

You can use plugins directly from GitHub without downloading them first by using the `gh:` prefix in the plugin filename:
    
```bash
influxdb3 create trigger \
    --trigger-spec "every:1m" \
    --plugin-filename "gh:examples/schedule/system_metrics/system_metrics.py" \
    --database my_database \
    system_metrics
```

Plugins have various functions such as: 

- Receive plugin-specific arguments (such as written data, call time, or an HTTP request)
- Can receive keyword arguments (as `args`) from _trigger arguments_
- Can access the `influxdb3_local` shared API for writing, querying, and managing state

### Create a custom plugin

When you need custom functionality, you can create your own plugin by doing the following:

> #### Step 1: Choose your plugin type

Reviewer: We typically avoid using numbered headings and instead insert an ordered TOC before the steps.

First, determine which type of plugin you need based on your automation goals:

| Plugin Type | Best For | Trigger Type |
|-------------|----------|-------------|
| **Data write** | Processing data as it arrives | `table:` or `all_tables` |
| **Scheduled** | Running code at specific times | `every:` or `cron:` |
| **HTTP request** | Creating API endpoints | `path:` |

#### Step 2: Create your plugin file

1. Create a `.py` file in your plugins directory
2. Add the appropriate function signature based on your chosen plugin type
3. Implement your processing logic inside the function

> ##### Option A: Create a data write plugin

Reviewer: Same here: avoid using numbered steps or options.

>
> Configure your plugin directory on the same system as the nodes that run the triggers and plugins.

## Add a Processing Engine plugin

A plugin is a Python script that defines a specific function signature for a trigger (_trigger spec_). When the specified event occurs, InfluxDB runs the plugin.

### Choose a plugin strategy

You have two main options for adding plugins to your InfluxDB instance:

- [Use example plugins](#use-example-plugins) - Quickly get started with prebuilt plugins

> - [Create a custom plugin](#create-a-custom-plugin) - Build your own for specialized use cases

Reviewer: 🥇

### Use example plugins

InfluxData provides a public repository of example plugins that you can use immediately. 

#### Browse plugin examples

Visit the [influxdb3_plugins repository](https://github.com/influxdata/influxdb3_plugins) to find examples for:

   - **Data transformation**: Process and transform incoming data
   - **Alerting**: Send notifications based on data thresholds
   - **Aggregation**: Calculate statistics on time series data
   - **Integration**: Connect to external services and APIs
   - **System monitoring**: Track resource usage and health metrics

#### Add example plugins

You can either copy a plugin or retrieve it directly from the repository:

{{< code-tabs-wrapper >}}

{{% code-tabs %}}
[Copy locally](#)
[Fetch via gh:](#)
{{% /code-tabs %}}

{{% code-tab-content %}}  

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/influxdata/influxdb3_plugins.git
   
# Copy a plugin to your configured plugin directory
cp influxdb3_plugins/examples/schedule/system_metrics/system_metrics.py /path/to/plugins/
```
{{% /code-tab-content %}}

{{% code-tab-content %}}
    
```bash

> # You can use plugins directly from GitHub without downloading them first by using the `gh:` prefix in the plugin filename:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# To retrieve and use a plugin directly from GitHub,
#  use the `gh:` prefix in the plugin filename:
```

influxdb3 create trigger \
    --trigger-spec "every:1m" \
    --plugin-filename "gh:examples/schedule/system_metrics/system_metrics.py" \
    --database my_database \
    system_metrics
```

{{% /code-tab-content %}}

{{< /code-tabs-wrapper >}}

Plugins have various functions such as: 

- Receive plugin-specific arguments (such as written data, call time, or an HTTP request)
- Access keyword arguments (as `args`) passed from _trigger arguments_ configurations
- Access the `influxdb3_local` shared API to write data, query data, and managing state between executions

> For details on available functions, arguments, and how plugins interact with InfluxDB, see the [Extended Plugin API documentation](/influxdb3/shared/v3-core-plugins/). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about available functions, arguments, and how plugins interact with InfluxDB, see the [Extended Plugin API documentation](/influxdb3/shared/v3-core-plugins/). 
```

### Create a custom plugin

To build custom functionality, you can create your own Processing Engine plugin. 

#### Prerequisites

Before you begin, make sure:

> - The Processing Engine is enabled on your InfluxDB 3 Core instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The Processing Engine is enabled on your {{% product-name %}} instance.
```

- You’ve configured the `--plugin-dir` where plugin files are stored.
- You have access to that plugin directory.

#### Steps to create a plugin:

- [Choose your plugin type](#choose-your-plugin-type)
- [Create your plugin file](#create-your-plugin-file)
- [Next Steps](#next-steps)

#### Choose your plugin type

Choose a plugin type based on your automation goals:

| Plugin Type | Best For | Trigger Type |
|-------------|----------|-------------|
| **Data write** | Processing data as it arrives | `table:` or `all_tables` |
| **Scheduled** | Running code at specific times | `every:` or `cron:` |
| **HTTP request** | Creating API endpoints | `path:` |

#### Create your plugin file

- Create a `.py` file in your plugins directory
- Add the appropriate function signature based on your chosen plugin type
- Write your processing logic inside the function

> After writing your plugin, [create a trigger](#Use-the-create-trigger-command) to connect it to a database event and define when it runs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After writing your plugin, [create a trigger](#use-the-create-trigger-command) to connect it to a database event and define when it runs.
```

#### Create a data write plugin

> Use a data write plugin to process data as it's written to the database. Ideal use cases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use a data write plugin to process data as it's written to the database. Ideal use cases include:
```

>
> Configure your plugin directory on the same system as the nodes that run the triggers and plugins.

## Add a Processing Engine plugin

A plugin is a Python file that contains a specific function signature that corresponds to a type of trigger (a _trigger spec_).

You have two main options for adding plugins to your InfluxDB instance:

- [Use example plugins](#use-example-plugins) - Quickest way to get started
- [Create a custom plugin](#create-a-custom-plugin) - For custom functionality

### Use example plugins

The InfluxData team maintains a repository of example plugins you can use immediately:

> 1. **Browse available plugins**: Visit the [influxdb3_plugins repository](https://github.com/influxdata/influxdb3_plugins) to find examples for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Browse available plugins: Visit the [influxdb3_plugins repository](https://github.com/influxdata/influxdb3_plugins) to find examples for:
```

   - **Data transformation**: Process and transform incoming data
   - **Alerting**: Send notifications based on data thresholds
   - **Aggregation**: Calculate statistics on time series data
   - **Integration**: Connect to external services and APIs
   - **System monitoring**: Track resource usage and health metrics

> 2. **Choose how to access plugins**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Copy a plugin or retrieve it directly from the repository:
```

**Option A: Copy plugins to your local directory**

>    

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Copy a plugin or retrieve it directly from the repository:
```

    return {"status": "success", "message": "Request processed"}
```

#### Step 3: Next Steps

After adding your plugin:
- You can [install Python dependencies](#install-python-dependencies) 
- Learn how to [extend plugins with API features and state management](#extend-plugins-with-api-features-and-state-management)
- Create a trigger to connect your plugin to database events

## Create a trigger to run a plugin

A trigger connects your plugin to a specific database event.
The plugin function signature in your plugin file determines which _trigger specification_
you can choose for configuring and activating your plugin.

> After setting up your plugin, you need to connect it to specific database events using triggers. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After setting up your plugin, configure a trigger to run it for a specific event. 
```

- Learn how to [extend plugins with API features and state management](#extend-plugins-with-api-features-and-state-management)
- Create a trigger to connect your plugin to database events

## Create a trigger to run a plugin

A trigger connects your plugin to a specific database event.
The plugin function signature in your plugin file determines which _trigger specification_
you can choose for configuring and activating your plugin.

After setting up your plugin, configure a trigger to run it for a specific event. 

### Understand trigger types

| Plugin Type | Trigger Specification | When Plugin Runs |
|------------|----------------------|-----------------|
| Data write | `table:<TABLE_NAME>` or `all_tables` | When data is written to tables |
| Scheduled | `every:<DURATION>` or `cron:<EXPRESSION>` | At specified time intervals |
| HTTP request | `path:<ENDPOINT_PATH>` | When HTTP requests are received |

### Create a trigger

Use the `influxdb3 create trigger` command with the appropriate trigger specification:

{{% code-placeholders "SPECIFICATION|PLUGIN_FILE|DATABASE_NAME|TRIGGER_NAME" %}}

```bash
influxdb3 create trigger \

>   --trigger-spec "<SPECIFICATION>" \

Reviewer: Because you're using code-placeholders here, I would remove the `<>` around the placeholders. Alternatively, you could keep them and include them in the `code-placeholders` expression. IMO, they're not necessary in this example.

Essentially, we want them to be the same. `<>` is commonly used in docs to clearly indicate that the value is a placeholder. By making them editable and highlighting them with a different color, `code-placeholders` serves the same purpose. So, we typically don't need to mix `<>` and `code-placeholders`.

    return {"status": "success", "message": "Request processed"}
```

#### Next steps

After writing your plugin:

- [Create a trigger](#use-the-create-trigger-command) to connect your plugin to database events

> - You can [install Python dependencies](#install-python-dependencies) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Install any Python dependencies](#install-python-dependencies) your plugin requires
```

> - Learn how to [extend plugins with API](/influxdb3/shared/v3-core-plugins/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Learn how to [extend plugins with the API](/influxdb3/version/extend-plugin/)
```
I think you know this, but we can't link to `/shared/` paths. It should link to the file that uses the shared file.
**Also**, we should create a directory for the processing engine docs, in-line with what we have for other versions:

```
content/influxdb3/core/process-data/
│
└── processing-engine/
    ├── _index.md                  # Main page for Processing Engine
    ├── plugins/                   # Plugin documentation
    │   ├── _index.md              # Overview of available plugins
    │   ├── extend-plugins.md
```

```
content/influxdb3/enterprise/process-data/
│
└── processing-engine/
    ├── _index.md                  # Main page for Processing Engine
    ├── plugins/                   # Plugin documentation
    │   ├── _index.md              # Overview of available plugins
    │   ├── extend-plugins.md
```
 
Sorry I didn't catch this before

Author: Thank you for providing the directory structure! It's very helpful :) @jstirnaman

  all_data_processor
```

The trigger runs when the database flushes ingested data for the specified tables to the Write-Ahead Log (WAL) in the Object store (default is every second).

The plugin receives the written data and table information.

> #### Option B: For scheduled events 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### For scheduled events 
```

The plugin receives the scheduled call time.

> #### Option C: For HTTP requests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### For HTTP requests
```

  auto_disable_processor
```

## Advanced trigger configuration

After creating basic triggers, you can enhance your plugins with these advanced features:

### Access community plugins from GitHub

Skip downloading plugins by referencing them directly from GitHub:

```bash
# Create a trigger using a plugin from GitHub
influxdb3 create trigger \
  --trigger-spec "every:1m" \
  --plugin-filename "gh:examples/schedule/system_metrics/system_metrics.py" \
  --database my_database \
  system_metrics
```

This approach:

- Ensures you're using the latest version
- Simplifies updates and maintenance
- Reduces local storage requirements

> ### Configure your triggers
> 
> #### Pass configuration arguments

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ensures you're using the latest version
- Simplifies updates and maintenance
- Reduces local storage requirements
```

Move these to the earlier section about installing plugins.

Provide runtine configuration to your plugins:

```bash
# Pass threshold and email settings to a plugin

> influxdb3 create trigger \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Provide runtime configuration to your plugins:
```

  --trigger-spec "every:1h" \
  --plugin-filename "threshold_check.py" \
  --trigger-arguments threshold=90,notify_email=admin@example.com \
  --database my_database \
  threshold_monitor
```
Your plugin accesses these values through the `args` parameter:

```python
def process_scheduled_call(influxdb3_local, call_time, args=None):

>     if args and "threshold" in args:

Reviewer: If we still need this, move it to the earlier section about trigger arguments.

Author: Could you explain why we potential wouldn't need this section? @jstirnaman

This creates a Python virtual environment in your plugins directory with the specified packages installed.

{{% show-in "enterprise" %}}

### Connect Grafana to your InfluxDB instance

> When configuring Grafana to connect to an InfluxDB 3 Enterprise instance:

Reviewer: You don't need to do this now, but we should:
- Generalize this recommendation beyond Grafana
- Add it to a list of multi-node recommendations (not specific to the processing engine)
